Modeling the 3D Breast Surface Using
Thermography
Gleidson M. Costa1(B) ,E u d o x i aL .S .M o u r a2,3 , Tiago B. Borchartt1 ,
and Aura Conci3
1 Department of Informatics, Federal University of Maranh˜ao, S˜ao Lu´ıs, Brazil
gleidsonmcosta@gmail.com, tiago.bonini@ufma.br
2 Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Rondˆonia, Porto Velho,
Brazil
eudoxia.moura@ifro.edu.br
3 Institute of Computing, Federal Fluminense University, Niter´oi, Brazil
aconci@id.uff.br
Abstract. Breast thermographies can show temperature distribution
and detect abnormalities in the body on examination. This work shows
an implementation allowing their used for three-dimensional (3d) models
of the breast surface from their acquisition in ﬁve diﬀerent angles. Firstly,
breast segmentation is performed using U-Nets trained for each angle.
Then, the segmented edges are transformed into parametric curves. Geo-
metric transformation converts these curves from two-dimensional (2d)
to a three-dimensional after proper rotations and translation of them.
These 3D curves are described by B-splines curves and used to build a
Rational Non-Uniform B-splines Surface (NURBS) for the breast region.
Texture mapping is applied to project the frontal thermal data onto the
3d surface. A Likert scale-based survey was conducted with healthcare
experts, and experienced academics to evaluate the ﬁnal results and com-
pare them with examples of the same persons. The results received high
grades of approval and agreements.
Keywords: Thermal imaging
· Breast cancer · Three-dimensional
models
1 Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer among women both in Brazil
and globally. As reported by the National Cancer Institute 73,610 new cases of
breast cancer were diagnosed in the country last year [ 1]. Projections indicate
that by 2040, this number could increase to over 3 million of new cases [2].
There are many exams to detect breast cancer, mammography is the most
popular. Despite, the accumulative eﬀect of the ionizing radiation of this exam,
mammography is considered the gold standard [ 3]. Thermography is a non-
invasive exam that analyses the heat emission from the body (breast region in
this case). It is aﬀordable, fast, can be used in young and pregnant women, and
c⃝ The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. T. Kakileti et al. (Eds.): AIIIMA 2023, LNCS 14298, pp. 45–56, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44511-8
_3
46 G. M. Costa et al.
presents great possibilities to assist in the detection of diseases [ 4,5]. A abnor-
mal heat distribution on the images can be related to early cancer formation,
because it can increase the metabolism of the area [7].
There are various types of treatments for breast cancer, which can be
employed individually or in combination, depending on the stage of the dis-
ease and the individual characteristics of each patient. Currently, mastectomy
and breast-conserving surgery are the most frequently performed surgical pro-
cedures [6]. After surgery to treat breast cancer, breast reconstruction may be
an option for some patients. This reconstruction can be done through implants
(prosthetic reconstruction) or through the transfer of tissue from other parts of
the body (autologous reconstruction) [8].
The use of three-dimensional models can bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts to the
breast reconstruction after cancer cure, promoting more satisfactory outcomes
for patients related to the shape similarity. The process of creating these 3D
models can be carried out through the utilization of a scanner, which captures
detailed information about the three-dimensional coordinates of the breast [ 9].
However, it is important to mention some disadvantages associated with this
approach, such as the high costs involved and the lack of access to this technology
in hospitals and clinics, as well as the potential inaccuracy in cases of considerable
breast size.
2 Materials and Methods
This study uses thermal imaging from the database published on the Visual Lab
website [10,11]. The 640 ×480 images were obtained with a FLIR SC620 (sensi-
tivity of 0.04◦C and range from −40 ◦C to 500◦C). This database contains 222
exams, but there are exams unsuitable for the purpose of this work (e.g. those
with capture on incorrect angles, mastectomized patients and unclear breast
edges), they were removed. After this, 140 exams could be used, each one pre-
senting breast images acquired in 5 direction: frontal (0
◦), oblique right lateral
(45◦), total right lateral (90◦), oblique left lateral ( −45◦) and total left lateral
(−90◦). The temperature matrices from these exams are used. The developed
approach employs techniques from two areas of computer vision (CV): image
processing (IP) and computer graphics (CG). IP methods are used at the begin-
ning to obtain aspects of the geometry of the breasts from the exams, and in the
ﬁnal step, to map textures corresponding to the temperatures. The intermediate
part of the process uses CG methods (or vector imaging) for construction and
positioning of curves, deﬁnition of transformation matrices and generation of 3-d
curves and the surface representing the breast under examination.
2.1 Image Processing Phase
The initial IP phase includes ﬁve steps as Fig. 1 shows: preprocessing, segmen-
tation, reﬁnement, identiﬁcation of the relevant edges and extraction key points
for each view.
Modeling the 3D Breast Surface Using Thermography 47
Fig. 1. Flowchart of image processing steps.
Preprocessing takes the original images (640× 480) and resized it to 256×256
pixels. The frontal exam is converted from the original format to RGB (Red,
Green, Blue) using the FLIR (Forward Looking Infra-Red) rain palette. In this
way, the frontal information is used in the ﬁnal step for rendering the 3d surface
by using texture mapping.
Segmentation uses U-net model of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to
performed the breast segmentation [ 12,13]. In fact, 5 CNNs of this model are
trained (i.e. hyper parameters are generated for 5 U-nets) each to be used in one
of the 5 exam positions. From the database subset used, 109 (78%) exams were
used for training the nets and 31 (22%) were separated for testing. The training
used 100 epochs in batches of 2 with 50 epochs. Net weights are initialized with
normal distribution of random values. Each convolution uses the rectiﬁed linear
unit activator ( ReLU) function to allow passing values that are greater than
0. Adam optimizer with learning rate 1 × 10
− 4 is used [ 14]. This allows the
region of the breasts to be separated (i.e. segmented) from the rest of the image,
as shown in Fig. 2. It is noteworthy to emphasize that, given the preliminary
nature of this study, segmentation evaluations in comparison with a ground truth
standard were not conducted. The analysis of segmented images was subjectively
carried out for validation purposes. Those results without apparently satisfactory
segmentations were simply excluded of the process.
Fig. 2. Example of segmentation outputs with the 5 U-nets.
48 G. M. Costa et al.
Reﬁnement was next performed since the U-net segmentation can present more
areas then the regions shown in Fig.2. Such areas must be removed, in order to
have only one main region connected per direction. This is done considering the
deletion of smaller areas from the output of the previous step. Figure3 (a) shows
an example of a U-net result that leaves smaller areas, they are indicated by the
red arrows. For this, a threshold is performed using Suzuki (Fig. 3 (b)) [16],
and then only the area with bigger number of pixels is kept in each direction.
Finally the Canny’s edge detection method (Fig.3 (c)) is applied resulting only
the largest connected edges [15]. This kind of reﬁnement is repeated for each of
the 5 views leaving only the largest edge in each one.
Fig. 3. Reﬁnement of the obtained segmentation in case of more than one area exists
as a result of neural network segmentation.
Identiﬁcation of the relevant edge and points of each view are important
because they help in identifying the shape of the breasts, both in width (front)
and in thickness and height (sides). They will be used later to generate the 3D
surface. The inframammary curves are of main interest, these will be used to
adjust all other curves from the relevant edges of each view of the exam in a
single 3D coordinate system. To obtain these elements, the identiﬁcation of the
relevant edges uses 4 steps. (1) Initially, the points in the lower region of each
edge are found, looking for the ﬁrst points from bottom to top in each result of
the previous step. That is, for each of the ﬁnal pixels of the horizontal direction,
the ﬁrst pixel of the edge is searched from bottom to top. This will be stored and
the subsequent ones ignored. Thus, at the end of this step, only the pixels closest
to the bottom of each of the 5 edges from the previous step will be available,
as shown in Fig. 4(a). (2) Then, a search is made for the ﬁrst pixels vertically,
starting from the right side of each image. Unlike the bottom-up search, the
lateral search consists of a lateral scan of each of the ﬁnal edge pixels starting
at the right end (to ﬁnd the closest pixels on this side). Output of this step is
s h o w ni nF i g .4(b). (3) Same idea is applied to deﬁne the edge on the left (to ﬁnd
the closest pixels on this side), this result is shown in Fig. 4(c). (4) Finally, all
pixels from step (1) that are found in any of the other 3 detections (steps 2 and
Modeling the 3D Breast Surface Using Thermography 49
3) are removed. That is, it is deleted from the result of (1) all points also present
in the relevant edges on the right and left sides. In this way, the resulting points
at the end of step (4) are just the points that are shown in Fig.4(d).
Fig. 4. Identiﬁcation of unique relevant edges of each view.
Extraction of each view key points for each examination angle (or for each
view) must be done, this consists of the identiﬁcation of three points: P1, P2
and P3 (Fig.5 show these points). They belong to the lower single edge of the 5
views, that is, from step (4) of the previous subsection. In the 0
◦,4 5◦ and −45◦
images, a point is found at the junction of the curves (in the center of the body:
P2) and 2 points corresponding to the inﬂections of the breast curves on the
right (P1) and left (P3) ﬁrst points. For images of 90◦ and −90◦, the beginning
and end of the curve are identiﬁed, they are presented on Fig.5(d) (P1 and P3)
and the third point is the lowest point of this curve (P2). Figure 5 shows these
points in the images resulting from segmentation in order to better identify their
meanings.
50 G. M. Costa et al.
Fig. 5. Identiﬁcation of the key points of each direction.
2.2 Using Computer Graphics (CG) T echniques
This phase uses CG resources (as shown in Fig. 6) to: (1) transform and place
the 2d edges in space, turning them in 9 body curves, (2) adjust the curves by
B-splines interpolating them, (3) generate boundary surfaces of the breasts, and
(4) render this surface using the frontal thermography of the patient as textures.
Fig. 6. Flowchart of the steps of the method using CG methods.
To describe the 3D shape of the breast, 9 curves are used (see Fig.7.F r o ma
0◦ image, three curves are generated following diﬀerent criteria: the ﬁrst curve
is deﬁned by all points to the right of P1; the second by all points to the left of
P3; and the third is an auxiliary curve that extends from P2 to the top of the
image (Fig.5). Then, four curves represent the complete edges of images rotated
at 45◦, −90◦, −45◦,a n d9 0◦, respectively. Additionally, two auxiliary curves are
created by replicating the edges of 45 ◦ and −45◦, which will later be rotated
at angles of 135 ◦ and −135◦, respectively (forming the central valley between
beasts).
Geometric transformations of the key points needs to use a 3D coordinate
system (Fig.7). The X and Y axis of this coordinate is the same horizontal and
vertical directions of the 2d images, respectively, while the Z axis is deﬁned by
the vector product of the X by Y. The edge of the 0 ◦ image is not rotated.
This edge will serve as the base of the 3d model in the z-plane. The edges
from the 45 ◦ and −90◦ breast views will have their contours rotated by 45 ◦
and −90◦, respectively, and positioned over point P3 obtained in the 0 ◦ view.
The edges from the −45◦ and 90◦ breast views will have their edges rotated
by −45◦ and 90◦, respectively, and positioned over point P1 obtained in the 0◦
view. The two auxiliary contours created from copying the 45◦ and −45◦ edges
will be rotated by 135 ◦ and −135◦. The processes of translation and rotation
are performed through transformation matrices, and all the points of the curves
Modeling the 3D Breast Surface Using Thermography 51
that pass through these axes are transformed by the corresponding angles. The
exclusion of points behind the frontal plane results in the correct ﬁnal edges. The
curves shown in Fig.7(a) illustrate how the various edge points are positioned in
a single view of the breast examination edges. At the end of this process, there
are 3D coordinates for all the edge points of the breast in vector form within a
single coordinate system.
Adjust of the curves by B-splines from the 9 curves of the previous step.
These 3d curves are initially described by all their points (raster format), but in
this stage, they will be transformed to vector form, i.e., through mathematical
expressions. CG parametric descriptions of B-Splines curves are used for this
purpose. Since the number of points in each of these curves is diﬀerent, a point
adjustment by B-spline is used to normalize the number of control points for each
curve. The B-spline function implemented in [17] is employed for this purpose.
The created curves are of degree 4, and results of deﬁnition of the control points
that deﬁnes the curves obtained in the previous step.
Generation of the NURBS Surface from the 9 B-Splines curves shown in
Fig.7 (a) in blue. The green dots (in Fig. 7 (b)) represent the vertices of the
triangles that generated the mesh, obtained after applying a generator of the
surface by NURBS [17]. In Fig. 7 (c), the vertices are displayed on a mesh with
volume-based coloring, where the bluer the color, the larger the volume, and the
redder the color, the smaller the volume, considering a background plane.
Fig. 7. (a) Points of the 9 curves generated by B-spline for each of the obtained curves
seen from two diﬀerent viewpoints. (b) Vertices obtained after applying NURBS (seen
from two diﬀerent viewpoints). (c) Mesh with volume-based coloring.
52 G. M. Costa et al.
2.3 Generation of the Three-Dimensional Thermography
The texture used to render the generated 3-d mesh is produced in the ﬁrst step
(Preprocessing) with false color technique (rain palette of FLIR). Figure8 shows
the texture of the frontal thermographic exam being associated with 2 vertices of
the model in a UV texture map. This mapping is repeated for all other vertices
and then used to render the region by using OpenGL library [18].
Fig. 8. Final polygonal mesh used for temperature (texture mapping) representation
producing a 3d thermogram.
3 Algorithm
All the steps comment in previous section form the complete system that has
been implemented using the Python programming language, employing the com-
puter vision library OpenCV for image processing tasks, and using OpenGL for
the CG (transformation, curves, surface and rendering) purposes. Algorithm 1
presents a succinct pseudo code representation of the image processing and com-
puter graphics procedure implemented.